In the 1860 presidential election, Republicans, led by Abraham Lincoln, supported banning slavery 
in all the U.S. territories at the time, something which the Southern states viewed as a violation 
of their constitutional rights and as being part of a plan to eventually abolish slavery. The three 
pro-Union candidates together received an overwhelming 82% majority of the votes cast nationally: 
Republican Lincoln's votes centered in the north, Democrat Douglas' votes were distributed nationally 
and Constitutional Unionist Bell's votes centered in Tennessee, Kentucky, and Virginia. The Republican
Party, dominant in the North, secured a plurality of the popular votes and a majority of the electoral 
votes nationally, so Lincoln was constitutionally elected the first Republican president.

But before his inauguration, seven slave states with cotton-based economies formed the Confederacy. The 
first six to declare secession had the highest proportions of slaves in their populations, a total of 
49 percent.[16] The first seven with state legislatures to resolve for secession included split majorities 
for unionists Douglas and Bell in Georgia with 51% and Louisiana with 55%. Alabama had voted 46% for those 
unionists, Mississippi with 40%, Florida with 38%, Texas with 25%, and South Carolina cast Electoral College
votes without a popular vote for president.[17] Of these, only Texas held a referendum on secession.

Eight remaining slave states continued to reject calls for secession. Outgoing Democratic President James 
Buchanan and the incoming Republicans rejected secession as illegal. Lincoln's March 4, 1861 inaugural
address declared that his administration would not initiate a civil war. Speaking directly to the 
"Southern States," he reaffirmed, "I have no purpose, directly or indirectly to interfere with the 
institution of slavery in the United States where it exists. I believe I have no lawful right to do so, 
and I have no inclination to do so."[18] After Confederate forces seized numerous federal forts within 
territory claimed by the Confederacy, efforts at compromise failed and both sides prepared for war. 
The Confederates assumed that European countries were so dependent on "King Cotton" that they would 
intervene, but none did, and none recognized the new Confederate States of America.

Hostilities began on April 12, 1861, when Confederate forces fired upon Fort Sumter. While in the Western 
Theater the Union made significant permanent gains, in the Eastern Theater, the battle was inconclusive 
in 1861–62. The autumn 1862 Confederate campaigns into Maryland and Kentucky failed, dissuading British 
intervention.[citation needed] Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which made ending slavery 
a war goal.[19] To the west, by summer 1862 the Union destroyed the Confederate river navy, then much of 
their western armies, and seized New Orleans. The 1863 Union siege of Vicksburg split the Confederacy in 
two at the Mississippi River. In 1863, Robert E. Lee's Confederate incursion north ended at the Battle 
of Gettysburg. Western successes led to Ulysses S. Grant's command of all Union armies in 1864. Inflicting 
an ever-tightening naval blockade of Confederate ports, the Union marshaled the resources and manpower to 
attack the Confederacy from all directions, leading to the fall of Atlanta to William T. Sherman and 
his march to the sea. The last significant battles raged around the Siege of Petersburg. Lee's escape 
attempt ended with his surrender at Appomattox Court House, on April 9, 1865. While the military war 
was coming to an end, the political reintegration of the nation was to take another 12 years of the 
Reconstruction Era.

The American Civil War was one of the earliest true industrial wars. Railroads, the telegraph, steamships,
and mass-produced weapons were employed extensively. The mobilization of civilian factories, mines, 
shipyards, banks, transportation and food supplies all foreshadowed the impact of industrialization in
World War I. It remains the deadliest war in American history. From 1861 to 1865, it has been 
traditionally estimated that about 620,000 died but recent scholarship argues that 750,000 soldiers 
died,[20] along with an undetermined number of civilians.[N 1] By one estimate, the war claimed the 
lives of 10 percent of all Northern males 20–45 years old, and 30 percent of all Southern white males
aged 18–40.[22]
